[[chapter6]]

== Static and Runtime Configuration

MTT must support both static and run-time configurability. A memory
region (consisting of one or more pages) may be (re)assigned from one
domain to another at run-time e.g. this is done by revoking the
permission for one domain and assigning permissions to another domain.
Run-time configuration may be performed via M-mode CSRs and/or in-memory
structures. The in-memory structures used for MTT must themselves be
access-limited to the RDSM by use of the MTT structures to disallow any
supervisor domain from accessing the structures unless explicitly
delegated by the Root Domain Security Manager (RDSM) to a particular
domain (per use case policies). To support MTT dynamic reconfiguration,
an interface is expected to be provided to set the attributes by passing
requests to a trusted driver (in the RDSM) that can reconfigure the
memory region assignment. Converting memory regions assignment from one
domain to another might involve platform-specific operations based on
the enforcement mechanism, such as TLB/cache flushes, that must be
enforced by the RDSM and hardware. The RDSM is expected to change the
settings and flush caches if necessary, so the system is only incoherent
during the transition between domain assignment settings. This
transitory state should not be visible to lower privilege levels (i.e.
supervisor domains).

=== Platform considerations

MTT may be used to provide permissions for physical memory addresses
that hold regular main memory or IO memory. Memory may be assigned to
the RDSM to bootstrap the subsequent run-time lookup structures for MTT.
All memory should be covered by the MTT, though some memory may not be
eligible to be qualified for assignment to a specific supervisor domain.
This limitation may arise due to platform configuration and security
policies - for example, if the platform security policy requires memory
for a domain to be encrypted and some memory access paths are not
enforced via an inline memory encryption engine. It is expected that the
RDSM can use trusted platform-specific methods to enumerate which
regions can be designated as access-controlled via the MTT.

== MTT Checker Implementation considerations 

MTTs are checked by the MTT checker for all accesses to eligible
physical memory, including accesses that have undergone virtual to
physical memory translation, but excluding MTT structure accesses. The
MTT checker indexes the MTT using the physical address of the access to
retrieve the access permissions, and checks that the hart is allowed to
access the physical memory accessed. A mismatch of the access type and
the access permissions specified in the MTT entry that applies to the
accessed region is reported as a trap to the RDSM and the access is
disallowed with no data divulged. As described above, to support
architectural virtual address page sizes, the MTT allows configuration
at those supported architectural page sizes. MTT violations manifest as
instruction, load, or store access-fault exceptions. The exception
conditions for MTT are checked when the access to memory is performed.

The intra-domain isolation of memory between two harts/devices belonging
to the same supervisor domain, but different tenant workloads, is
achieved via the use of MMU, (S)PMP, IOMMU and IOPMP depending on the
type of platform and the type of access. To successfully achieve this
isolation, the page table structures for a domain's workloads must be
managed by the Supervisor Domain Security Manager (SDSM) and the paging
structures must be located in memory exclusively-accessible only to the
Supervisor Domain. Additional security properties may be enforced based
on type (data fetch, instruction fetch, etc.) and locality (hart
supervisor domain identifier) of memory accesses as required for the
security policy specific to usages. An example policy may be to require
certain accesses to target only exclusively-owned domain memory. The MTT
checker may utilize the SDID or the Svpams derived metadata to enforce
such policies. The description of Supervisor Domain policies is outside
the scope of this document.

Different types of trust models are possible to build with domain
isolation. For example, with mutually distrusting domains, the RDSM will
always enforce the MTT check on all accesses. But if one domain is
considered at a higher trust level than the other, then the RDSM may
choose to program the MTT checker to bypass MTT checks for the higher
trust domain but not the lower trust one to optimize performance for the
higher trust domain workloads. To support such an option, the hart MTT
CSR mode field must allow the RDSM to explicitly disable the MTT lookup
for RDSM-selected SDIDs. The CSR allows this by setting the MTT to Bare
mode for such cases.

== Extensibility

In addition to the access permissions looked up via the MTT structure,
additional access qualifiers and metadata may be maintained and/or
carried/associated on the SoC fabric to support other capabilities. MTTs
must apply to domain-related hart and non-hart accesses. This enables
other hardware agents (for example devices connected over interconnects,
IOMMU etc.) to be able to access domain memory in a consistent manner.
Devices assigned to a domain may generate memory access requests with
the appropriate domain identifier for evaluation by the IO-side access
checks. IO-side access checks enforce the domain isolation of physical
memory by using the MTT checker similar to the hart-side MTT checker
described above. Trust establishment of devices attached to an exposed
interconnect is outside the scope of this specification and should be
performed via a fabric specific mechanism (for example, see DMTF SPDM
and PCIe Trusted Device Interface Security Protocol). See
link:#figure-10.1-example-of-mtt-checker-in-a-soc[[.underline]#Figure
10&#44;1#] below for an example use of supervisor domains in a SoC.

[caption="Figure {counter:image}: ", reftext="Figure {image}"]
[title= "Example of MTT Checker in a SoC"]
image::fig5.png[]

