[[chapter8]]
[[Smsdedbg]]
== `Smsdedbg`: Supervisor Domain External Debug

The <<MSDCFG>> CSR contains the `sdedbgalw` bit that controls whether the
current scheduled SD is allowed to be external-debugged. This bit is context
switched (along with rest of the `msdcfg`) per SD.

=== `Smsdedbg` interaction with external debug security controls (Informative)

[caption="Figure {counter:image}: ", reftext="Figure {image}"]
[title= "External Debug for Supervisor Domain", id=Smsdedbg_img]
image::images/Smsdedbg.png[]

This section will be moved into the non-ISA specification for external debug
security. It is described here as informational.

The `medbgen` is an enable control for external debug for the M-mode driven by
the debug module and is expected to be established by the RoT (following RISC-V
Security Model recommendation SR_GEN_007 and SR_GEN_012). When privilege is `M`,
the `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug module and if is 0 prevents
the hart from entering external debug mode. When privilege is less than `M`, the
OR of the `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` and `medbgen` gates the `haltreq` from the debug
module and the hart will enter external debug mode if either is 1.

The configuration for `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` may be obtained from the manifest/
configuration of the supervisoer domain and should be managed by the M-mode root
security manager using secure memory.

When `medbgen` is 1, there are no restrictions. When `medbgen` is 0 but
`MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is 1, then the external debug mode may be entered but is
restricted by `M-mode` software to prevent privileged CSR accesses and memory
accesses by instructions executed in external debug mode cannot use `M` privilege.
When `medbgen` is 0 and `MSDCFG.sdedbgalw` is also 0, the M-mode root domain
security manager must not configure triggers with `action=1`. Triggers for the
supervisor domain are expected to be controlled by the root domain security
manager to prevent any leakage of information.
