[[intro]]

== Introduction

RISC-V privileged architecture cite:[ISA] defines execution mode for supervisor
software called S-mode. S-mode software may optionally enable Hypervisor
extension to host virtual machines. Typically, there is a single supervisor
domain of execution with access to all physical memory. This document describes
*Supervisor Domain Access Protection* - a RISC-V privileged architecture
extension to support physical address space (memory and devices) isolation for
more than one supervisor domain. Supervisor domains enable trusted execution
use cases for RISC-V platforms. Supervisor domains may also be used to reduce
the supervisor Trusted Computing Base (TCB), with differential access to memory
and other platform resources e.g. in Confidential VM Extension (CoVE), TEE
Security Services, Secure Devices etc.

Tenant (application or VM) workloads on multi-tenant platforms rely on
hardware-based isolation primitives that are managed by the host/privileged
software. Traditional host software (operating systems and virtual machine
monitors) have unfettered access to system memory, devices and hardware
isolation mechanisms such as the memory management unit (MMU) or physical
memory protection (PMP) registers. Typical multi-tenant platforms also have a
very large Trusted Computing Base (TCB) and have many threat actors that
influence the TCB. For example, in a multi-tenant data-center environment, the
host software, devices and device drivers, cloud operators, orchestration
services, other tenant workloads etc. are all considered threat vectors.
Additional threats originate due to deployment models, for example, an embedded
platform deployed in the field is exposed to physical threat vectors. Hence, in
many scenarios isolated supervisor domains are desired to be able to express
differentiated trust models and secure access to platform resources. A
supervisor domain uses resources (such as memory/IO regions, processing
elements, devices and interrupts) to perform their function.

[caption="Figure {counter:image}: ", reftext="Figure {image}"]
[title= "Supervisor Domains"]
image::images/fig1.png[]

A supervisor domain is associated with a set of physical address regions that
are isolated from other supervisor domains on the same platform, with only the
Root Domain Security Manager (RDSM) with access to all of the physical address
space. A supervisor domain identifier (SDID) is associated with the supervisor
domain to facilitate physical address protection fences on a per supervisor
domain basis. Supervisor domains must rely on a TCB which consists of the RDSM
(software) and hardware (hart, SoC, Root-of-trust) that enforces the isolation
properties for the supervisor domain. Isolation of the workloads within a
supervisor domain is the responsibility of the OS/hypervisor managing the
supervisor domain, here referred to as the Supervisor Domain Security Manager
(SDSM).

A key goal of using multiple domains is to be able to reduce the common TCB
across domains, and should enable the attestation cite:[CCC] of each domain
independently from other domains. Sensitive data may be entrusted to a
particular domain after verifying the trust properties statically (via boot) or
dynamically (via attestation). These trust properties are established as part
of the hardware and software supply chain, system configuration and may be
additionally evaluated using attestation mechanisms. The security certification
of the RDSM is desirable but out of scope of this specification.

Use cases for supervisor domain isolation range from embedded to
application/server-class platforms. Some examples where supervisor domains can
be used are:

* A trusted execution environment domain that isolates security
services/applications.
* A confidential computing cite:[CCC] domain which enforces confidentiality and
integrity for workload data-in-use from the host/untrusted hypervisor, along
with attestation of the TCB.
* A host (operator) domain that manages resources on the platform, and may
assign resources to other domains.
* A service-provider domain that has exclusive access to some devices.

In order to avoid re-factoring of deployed host software, workloads and
applications, new hardware primitives are required to support memory isolation
for domains. A second key requirement the new hardware primitives must address
is the performance and scalability of physical memory isolation at a page-level
to support rich-OS memory management models. This specification describes the
architecture primitives to support the requirements of a multi-supervisor
domain physical address isolation model via a Supervisor Domain Access
Protection (Smmtt) extension for RISC-V processor-based platforms.
